docs: added tutorials for charmed istio (#2)
canonical/service-mesh: docs/tutorial/getting-started-with-istio-mesh.md

## Introduction

In this tutorial, you'll learn the fundamentals of deploying and securing applications with Charmed Istio. We'll use a simplified version of the `Bookinfo` application that consists of a frontend (`bookinfo-productpage-k8s`) and a backend (`bookinfo-details-k8s`) charm. By the end of this tutorial, you'll understand how to:

- Deploy the Istio control plane and ingress gateway
- Deploy and connect application charms
- Add charms to the service mesh
- Configure authorization policies for secure communication

## Prerequisites

This tutorial assumes you have a Juju controller bootstrapped on a 
MicroK8s cloud that is ready to use, on a 4CPU 8GB node or better, with at least 40Gi disk space.
Typical setup using [snaps](https://snapcraft.io/) 
can be found in the [Juju docs](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/howto/manage-your-deployment/).

Follow the instructions there to install Juju and MicroK8s.

This tutorial also assumes you have a basic knowledge of Juju.

> ## Configure MicroK8s

Author: Your'e right. The linked `add-ons` page already provides instructions on how to do it, I thought itd be easier to have it here and the observability docs also had it here. But i agree, we just should refer to the already existing docs. removed the instructions.

For the COS Lite bundle deployment to go smoothly, make sure the following MicroK8s [addons](https://microk8s.io/docs/addons) are enabled: `dns`, `hostpath-storage`, and `metallb`.

You can check this with `microk8s status`, and if any are missing, enable them with 

```bash
microk8s enable dns 
microk8s enable hostpath-storage 
IPADDR=$(ip -4 -j route get 2.2.2.2 | jq -r '.[] | .prefsrc')
microk8s enable metallb:$IPADDR-$IPADDR
```

To wait for all the addons to be rolled out, run:

```bash
microk8s kubectl rollout status deployments/hostpath-provisioner -n kube-system -w
microk8s kubectl rollout status deployments/coredns -n kube-system -w
microk8s kubectl rollout status daemonset.apps/speaker -n metallb-system -w
```

```{note}
If you have an HTTP proxy configured, you will need to give this information to MicroK8s. See [the proxy documentation](https://microk8s.io/docs/install-proxy) for details.
```

```{note} 
By default, MicroK8s will use `8.8.8.8` and `8.8.4.4` as DNS servers, which can be adjusted. See [the DNS documentation](https://microk8s.io/docs/addon-dns) for details.
```

> 

Author: Removed

## Deploy Charmed Istio

### Step 1: Set up the Istio System

Create a dedicated model for Istio components and deploy the core charms:

```bash
juju add-model istio-system
juju deploy istio-k8s --trust --channel 2/edge
juju deploy istio-ingress-k8s --trust --channel 2/edge
```

This deploys:
- **`istio-k8s`**: Core Istio components including `Istiod` (control plane), `ztunnel` (secure tunneling), and `istio-core-dns`
- **`istio-ingress-k8s`**: Ingress gateway for external traffic

For more details about these components, see the [Istio architecture documentation](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/deployment/architecture/).

### Step 2: Offer Istio Ingress

> Make the `istio-ingress-k8s` charm available to other Juju models so applications from other Juju models can be ingressed using the `istio-ingress-k8s` charm:

Author: done

```bash
juju offer istio-ingress-k8s:ingress-unauthenticated
```

## Deploy Charmed Bookinfo Application

The charmed `bookinfo` application is a simplified version of [Istio's sample application](https://istio.io/latest/docs/examples/bookinfo/) that demonstrates microservice communication patterns.

### Application Architecture

The application consists of two charms:
- **`bookinfo-productpage-k8s`**: Frontend charm that displays book information
- **`bookinfo-details-k8s`**: Backend charm that provides book details

### Step 3: Deploy Application Components

Create a model for the application and deploy the charms:

```bash
juju add-model bookinfo

# Deploy the charms
juju deploy bookinfo-productpage-k8s 
juju deploy bookinfo-details-k8s

# Connect the charms
juju integrate bookinfo-productpage-k8s:details bookinfo-details-k8s:details
```

Now you can sit back and watch the deployment take place:

```bash
juju status --integrations --watch=5s
```

### Step 4: Configure External Access

> Connect the application to the Istio ingress gateway:

Author: done

```bash
juju consume istio-system.istio-ingress-k8s
juju integrate bookinfo-productpage-k8s istio-ingress-k8s:ingress-unauthenticated
```

### Step 5: Access the Application

Get the application URL and verify it's working:

```bash
juju run bookinfo-productpage-k8s/0 get-url
```

Open the URL in your browser. You'll see the book information page.

![Bookinfo application showing book details](../assets/images/bookinfo-details.png)

```{note}

> You'll notice an "Error fetching product reviews" message on the page. This is expected behavior as we haven't deployed the reviews charm yet. To add the reviews functionality, see the [Getting Started with Charmed Istio: Cross-Model Mesh](./getting-started-with-istio-cross-model-mesh.md) tutorial.

Author: done

```

> ## Secure with Service Mesh

Author: Done. I have added a bit more information on what service mesh brings to the table so the user is aware what he will be trying to achieve in the upcoming steps.

> ## Secure with Service Mesh

Reviewer: I'm going to review now, but dropping the idea here that if there's cases of info that we want the user to have but that feel out of scope for the tutorial, those are good ideas for other short explanation docs.  So maybe a "what does service mesh do for you" kinda explanation doc would help?

> ## Secure with Service Mesh

Author: Agreed, #3 addresses this.

### Step 6: Add Services to the Mesh

Deploy the `istio-beacon-k8s` charm and connect it to the `bookinfo-details-k8s` charm:

```bash
juju deploy istio-beacon-k8s --channel 2/edge
juju integrate bookinfo-details-k8s istio-beacon-k8s
```

The `istio-beacon-k8s` charm adds the `bookinfo-details-k8s` charm to the Istio service mesh and applies a default-deny security policy. Refresh the application - you'll notice the details section is no longer accessible because the `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` charm is not authorized to communicate with it.

![Bookinfo application with authorization error](../assets/images/bookinfo.png)

### Step 7: Configure Service Authorization

Add the `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` charm to the mesh to enable secure communication:

```bash
juju integrate bookinfo-productpage-k8s istio-beacon-k8s
```

The `istio-beacon-k8s` charm automatically creates authorization policies allowing `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` to access specific endpoints on the `bookinfo-details-k8s` charm via `GET` requests on port `9080`.

> Refresh the application - the details section should now be available again, but this time secured by Istio's authorization policies and mutual TLS (`mTLS`) via the [`HBONE`](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/architecture/hbone/) protocol.

Author: removed

- Deploy the Istio control plane and ingress gateway
- Add charms to the service mesh
- Verify security controls brought about by the service mesh

## Prerequisites

This tutorial assumes you have a [Juju](https://juju.is) controller bootstrapped on a 
[MicroK8s](https://microk8s.io/) cloud that is ready to use, on a 4 CPU, 8 GB node or better, with at least 40 GB disk space.
Typical setup using [snaps](https://snapcraft.io/) 
can be found in the [Juju docs](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/howto/manage-your-deployment/).

This tutorial also assumes you have a basic knowledge of Juju.

## Configure MicroK8s

For this tutorial to go smoothly, make sure the following MicroK8s [addons](https://microk8s.io/docs/addons) are enabled: `dns`, `hostpath-storage`, and `metallb`.

You can check this with `microk8s status` and enable any missing addons.

## Deploy Charmed Istio

### Step 1: Set up the Istio System

> Create a dedicated model for Istio components and deploy the core charms:

Author: I agree this feels like a TMI to put in here and also especially with K8s namespace and Juju model info. It might throw the user off. Also again i think we should keep the explanation to the explanation section and reference it here if appropriate.

> Create a dedicated model for Istio components and deploy the core charms:

Author: https://github.com/canonical/service-mesh/issues/3

```bash
juju add-model istio-system
juju deploy istio-k8s --trust --channel 2/edge
juju deploy istio-ingress-k8s --trust --channel 2/edge
```

The [`istio-k8s`](https://charmhub.io/istio-k8s) charm deploys and manages the control plane of an Istio service mesh on Kubernetes, enabling you to configure and manage Istio through Juju.

The [`istio-ingress-k8s`](https://charmhub.io/istio-ingress-k8s) charm manages Istio ingress gateways in Kubernetes clusters and provides an ingress endpoint for charms that use it. 

### Step 2: Offer Istio Ingress

Make the `istio-ingress-k8s` charm available to other Juju models so applications from other Juju models can be ingressed using the `istio-ingress-k8s` charm by [offering](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/reference/juju-cli/list-of-juju-cli-commands/offer/) it:

```bash
juju offer istio-ingress-k8s:ingress-unauthenticated
```

## Deploy Charmed Bookinfo Application

The Bookinfo application consists of three charms:
- **`bookinfo-productpage-k8s`**: Frontend charm that displays book information
- **`bookinfo-details-k8s`**: Backend charm that provides book details

> - **`bookinfo-reviews-k8s`**: Backend charm that provides book reviews 

Reviewer: I suggested you include a list like this above, but maybe its better here instead.  Your call.  

If you accept the above suggestion with a bulleted list about bookinfo, you could remove it here (or just copy these up there, as these are good descriptions)

Author: I simplified the introduction. I feel like we should keep the intro simple and introduce the (kind of) architecture of the bookinfo app here where it seems more appropriate.

![Charmed bookinfo application architecture](../assets/images/charmed-bookinfo-architecture.drawio.png)

### Step 3: Deploy Application Components

Create a model for the application and deploy the charms:

```bash
juju add-model bookinfo

# Deploy the charms
juju deploy bookinfo-productpage-k8s 
juju deploy bookinfo-details-k8s
juju deploy bookinfo-reviews-k8s

# Connect the charms
juju integrate bookinfo-productpage-k8s:details bookinfo-details-k8s:details
juju integrate bookinfo-productpage-k8s:reviews bookinfo-reviews-k8s:reviews

```

Now you can sit back and watch the deployment take place:

```bash
juju status --integrations --watch=5s
```

### Step 4: Configure External Access

Expose the `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` using the `istio-ingress-k8s` ingress gateway. It is necessary to [consume](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/reference/juju-cli/list-of-juju-cli-commands/consume/) `istio-ingress-k8s` from the `istio-system` model into the `bookinfo` model before adding the ingress relation.

```bash
juju consume istio-system.istio-ingress-k8s

> juju integrate bookinfo-productpage-k8s istio-ingress-k8s:ingress-unauthenticated

Reviewer: For the purposes of this tutorial, I think you can always use `ingress` instead of `ingress-unauthenticated`.  `ingress` is unauthenticated *unless it has an authentication provider connected*, and generally its the one most people want.

Reviewer: maybe we should add an explainer doc saying when to use one or the other, however.

Author: Good point, even I dont fully understand the difference except for an one-line. So I have created an issue to follow this up - #7

```

This ingress relation would allow the `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` charm to be accessed from outside the cluster, for example, your browser.

### Step 5: Access the Application

Get the application URL and verify it's working:

```bash
juju run bookinfo-productpage-k8s/0 get-url
```

Open the URL in your browser. You'll see the book information page.

![Bookinfo application](../assets/images/bookinfo-details-reviews.png)

> ## Why Do We Need Charmed Istio?

Reviewer: This is an example of a good section we could move to its own page.  The value statement of service mesh is something people outside this guide would like to know too.

If we moved this elsewhere, we could here just say that we want Istio because it easily adds mTLS and authorization control, and leave the deeper explanation to the link

While the application works, it has critical security vulnerabilities:

> ### No Encryption Between Services

Reviewer: Suggestion for clarify.  "No encryption between services" could be a statement saying you wont have it after charmed istio.  What about rephrasing it?

Also, "between services" could be a bit misunderstood because `Service` has meaning in kubernetes.  What about "workloads"?

```suggestion
### Communication Between Workloads is not Encrypted by Default
```

All microservice communication happens over plain HTTP. This means sensitive data is exposed to anyone with network access and can be intercepted or modified.

> While Kubernetes supports [manual TLS configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tls/), managing certificates for each microservice becomes exponentially complex as your architecture scales - requiring certificate generation, distribution, rotation, and troubleshooting across potentially hundreds of services.

Reviewer: I'm not sure, but I think this link describes how to use TLS to encrypt traffic to the k8s API, not between applications.  The general problem of managing certs between all your apps is a pain though, that's a good value add from a service mesh

Author: As a part of that linked doc there is also information about managing TLS certificates in a cluster.

### Unrestricted Service Communication

Every service can access every other service without restrictions. If an attacker compromises one service, they immediately gain access to your entire application. You can verify this unrestricted access:

```bash
# All endpoints are accessible with any HTTP method
kubectl exec -n bookinfo bookinfo-productpage-k8s-0 -- curl -s http://bookinfo-details-k8s.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local:9080/
kubectl exec -n bookinfo bookinfo-productpage-k8s-0 -- curl -s http://bookinfo-details-k8s.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local:9080/health
kubectl exec -n bookinfo bookinfo-productpage-k8s-0 -- curl -s http://bookinfo-details-k8s.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local:9080/details/1

# Even potentially dangerous methods like POST work
kubectl exec -n bookinfo bookinfo-productpage-k8s-0 -- curl -s -X POST http://bookinfo-details-k8s.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local:9080/details/1 -d '{}'
```

> There are no [authorization policies](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/) controlling:
> - Which services can communicate
> - What HTTP methods are allowed
> - Which endpoints can be accessed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Kubernetes provides some network controls to partly address this, Istio provides a richer [AuthorizationPolicy](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/) object that lets you define:
- Which workloads can communicate to which 
- Specifically how how they can communicate (what HTTP methods are allowed, endpoints can be accessed, etc)

So for example, through Istio we could say:
- `PodA` is allowed to talk to `PodB` using `GET` and `POST` on port `1234`
- nobody is allowed to talk to `PodC`
```

### The Charmed Istio Solution

Charmed Istio automatically provides:
- **mTLS encryption** between all services without manual certificate management
- **Fine-grained authorization policies** defining exactly which services can communicate
- **Simplified Day 2 operations** through Juju relations, making security configuration as easy as connecting charms

Let's secure our application with Charmed Istio.

## Secure with Service Mesh

### Step 6: Add Services to the Mesh

Deploy the `istio-beacon-k8s` charm and connect it to the bookinfo backend charms:

```bash
juju deploy istio-beacon-k8s --channel 2/edge
juju integrate bookinfo-details-k8s istio-beacon-k8s
juju integrate bookinfo-reviews-k8s istio-beacon-k8s
```

With the above two simple commands, the `istio-beacon-k8s` charm 

- Adds the `bookinfo-details-k8s` and `bookinfo-reviews-k8s` charms to the Istio service mesh
- Applies [mTLS](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2023/secure-apps-with-istio/) for the traffic between the services in the mesh

> - Applies a **deny-by-default** [authorization policy](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/) 

Reviewer: suggestion... not sure its perfect though.  I wanted to explain a tiny bit more about what deny-by-default meant in this context

```suggestion
- Applies a **deny-by-default** [authorization policy](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/) which means traffic to anything on the mesh is denied unless explicitly allowed
```

Refresh the application - you'll notice that the details section and the reviews section are no longer accessible because the `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` charm is not authorized to communicate with them.

![Bookinfo application with authorization error](../assets/images/bookinfo.png)

Add the `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` charm to the mesh to enable secure communication:

```bash
juju integrate bookinfo-productpage-k8s istio-beacon-k8s
```

> The `istio-beacon-k8s` charm automatically creates authorization policies allowing `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` to access specific endpoints on the `bookinfo-details-k8s` and `bookinfo-reviews-k8s` charms via `GET` requests on port `9080`. Check the [How-To](../how-to/index.md) section for details on how to add support for Charmed Istio in your own charm and define authorization policies.

Reviewer: suggestion for clarity
```suggestion
Through the `service-mesh` relation, any app that needs to grant access for something to communicate with it requests that `istio-beacon-k8s` create the necessary authorization policies.  These requests are generated automatically by the charms based on their relations.  For example:
* `bookinfo-details-k8s` requests an authorization policy to allow `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` at XXXXX
* `bookinfo-reviews-k8s` requests an authorization policy to allow `bookinfo-productpage-k8s` to `GET` it on port `9080`

Check the [How-To](../how-to/index.md) section for details on how to add support for Charmed Istio in your own charm and define authorization policies.
```

Reviewer: Yeah I see where you're coming from.  I could also see a user saying "automatically how?" :D  

I'm happy if we have a link to an explanation page about this.  So if we park this in an issue to update later, lgtm

Author: #3

```

Notice how the same commands that worked before are now properly restricted based on endpoint and HTTP method.

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter issues during the deployment:

1. Check the status of all charms:
   ```bash
   juju status --integrations
   ```

2. Verify the Istio components are running:
   ```bash
   kubectl get pods -n istio-system
   ```

3. Check if the application pods are running:
   ```bash
   kubectl get pods -n bookinfo 
   ```

4. Review the Juju debug logs for any issues:
   ```bash
   juju debug-log --include istio-beacon-k8s
   ```

## Summary

Congratulations! You've successfully:

- Deployed Charmed Istio service mesh
- Deployed the Charmed Bookinfo web application  
- Secured the application with mesh integration
- Configured fine-grained authorization policies

## Teardown

To clean up the resources created in this tutorial, run:

```bash
juju destroy-model bookinfo
juju destroy-model istio-system
```

```{tip}
If you're planning to continue with the [Getting Started with Charmed Istio: Cross-Model Mesh](./getting-started-with-istio-cross-model-mesh.md) tutorial, keep both models running as it builds upon this deployment.

> ```

Reviewer: nit: move this above "# Teardown" to avoid someone noticing it too late? :D
